---
title: "Bellabeat: How Can a Wellness Technology Company Play It Smart? - Case Study Project"
author: "Alaye Lawson"
date: "2023-05-30"
---



## Introduction and background
This is a Capstone Project for the Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate.

Bellabeat is a high-tech company that manufactures health-focused smart products that help women easily track their overall health and wellness, and get connected to their body and mind throughout different stages in life.

I will be using the 6 phases of the analysis process; Ask, Prepare, Process, Analyse, Share, and Act for my analysis of this project.

### Project Brief and Business Task

Bellabeat is a high-tech manufacturer of beautifully-designed health-focused smart products for women since 2013. Inspiring and empowering women with knowledge about their own health and habits, Bellabeat has grown rapidly and quickly positioned itself as a tech-driven wellness company for females.

The task is to analyze smart device usage data in order to gain insight into how consumers use non-Bellabeat smart devices and discover trends for Bellabeat marketing strategy. These questions will guide my analysis;

* What are some trends in smart device usage?
* How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
* How could these trends help influence Bellabeat marketing strategy?

Primary Stakeholder(s):

* Urska Srsen - Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and co-founder of Bellabeat
* Sando Mur - Mathematician and co-founder of Bellabeat

Secondary Stakeholder:

* Bellabeat Marketing Analytics Team

## Data Preparation
### Data Source 

[FitBit Fitness Tracker Data](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit) (CC0: Public Domain, dataset made available through [Mobius](https://www.kaggle.com/arashnic)): This Kaggle data set contains personal fitness tracker from thirty fitbit users. Generated by respondents from a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk between 12 March 2016 to 12 May 2016.
Thirty eligible Fitbit users consented to the submission of personal tracker data, including minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring. It includes information about daily activity, steps, and heart rate that can be used to explore users’ habit.

### Data Credibility Check

To determine the credibility of the data, I will be using the ROCC framework; is the data Reliable, Original, Comprehensive, Current, and Cited?

* Reliability - the data was sourced from a small sample size of 30 participants. This limits the reliability of the the data.
* Originality - the data was gotten from a third, it was originally collected from Amazon Mechanical Murk.
* Comprehensiveness - most of the data points required for the analysis match what will be seen in Bellabeat products.
* Currency - the data was collected in 2016, which is 7 years ago and may not represent the current rends in smart device usage.
* Cited - the data was gotten from a third party, so it is unknown if the information is credible.

Overall, the dataset is considered to be of bad quality and it is not recommended to produce high level business recommendations based on this data.

For my analysis, I will be using the ‘dailyActivity_merged’, and ‘sleepDay_merged’ csv files from the dataset.
I will be using R for data cleaning, manipulation and visualization.


## Data Cleaning and Processing
### Loading common packages and libraries 

```{r Load Tidyverse}
library(tidyverse)
```

```{r Load Skimr}
library(skimr)
```

```{r Load Janitor}
library(janitor)
```

### Importing data files
```{r importing data}
daily_activity <- read_csv("dailyActivity_merged.csv")
sleep_day <- read.csv("sleepDay_merged.csv")
```

### Exploring some key tables from the data

A look at the daily_activity data.
```{r Preview d_a}
head(daily_activity)
```

Now, I’m want to see if there are any null or missing values in the data.
```{r}
skim_without_charts(daily_activity)
```

Now, to take a look at the sleep_day data.
```{r preview sleep data}
head(sleep_day)
```

Check for any null or missing values in the sleep_day data.
```{r}
skim_without_charts(sleep_day)
```

There are no missing data in both datasets.


The columns containing the times in both datasets are not properly named and the time column (sleep_day) in the sleep_day data includes date and time. 

First, we have to separate the date and time in sleep_day dataframe into different columns.
```{r spearate date and time}
sleep_df <- separate(sleep_day, 
                          col = SleepDay,
                          into = c ("Date", "Time"),
                          sep = " ", 
                          remove = TRUE)
```

Now, I'll rename ActivityDate column  to "date" in daily_activity dataframe
```{r rename date column}
daily_df <- rename(daily_activity, Date = ActivityDate)
```

I want to add a new column to get total active minutes in the daily activity dataframe.
```{r Total active minutes column}
daily_df <- daily_df %>% 
  mutate(TotalActiveMinutes = VeryActiveMinutes + FairlyActiveMinutes + LightlyActiveMinutes, .before = SedentaryMinutes)
```


### Understanding some summary statistics
How many unique participants are there in each dataframe? It appears there may be more participants in the daily activity dataset than the sleep dataset.
```{r distinct users}
n_distinct(daily_df$Id)
n_distinct(sleep_df$Id)
```
There are 33 unique IDs, instead of 30 unique IDs of 30 participants in the survey as indicated by the metadata. 


Are there any duplicates in the data?
```{r no of duplicate rows}
nrow(daily_df[duplicated(daily_df),])
nrow(sleep_df[duplicated(sleep_df),])
```
There are 3 duplicate rows in the sleep day dataframe. The duplicate rows will be removed.
```{r Remove duplicates}
sleep_df <- unique(sleep_df)
nrow(sleep_df)
```
**Summary of data cleaning and manipulation**

* Checked for any null or missing values in both dataframes.

* Separated the date and time in sleep_day dataframe into different "Date" & "Time" columns.

* Renamed "ActivityDate" column  to "Date" in daily_activity dataframe.

* Added total active minutes column in the Daily_activity dataframe by summing very active minutes, fairly active minutes, & lightly active minutes.

* Identified and removed 3 duplicate rows in Sleep_day data

Now, that the data cleaning and manipulation has been done, it's time to analyse the data.

## Data Analysis

Let's look at some descriptive statistics of each dataframe.

For the daily activity dataframe:
```{r Daily activity desciptive stat}
daily_df %>% 
  select(TotalSteps,
         TotalDistance,
         VeryActiveMinutes,
         FairlyActiveMinutes,
         LightlyActiveMinutes,
         TotalActiveMinutes,
         SedentaryMinutes,
         Calories) %>% 
  summary()
```

For the sleep dataframe
```{r Sleep data desciptive stat}
sleep_df %>% 
  select(TotalMinutesAsleep,
         TotalTimeInBed,
        ) %>% 
  summary()
```

* Steps and Distance: The average daily steps are recorded at 7,638, However, for general fitness, adults should aim for 10,000 steps per day, as recommended by the CDC. However, the number will depend on a person’s age, current fitness level, and health goals.
It’s thought that walking 10,000 steps a day may lower blood pressure, improve blood glucose levels, and boost moods. Source: [MedicalNewsToday](https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/how-many-steps-should-you-take-a-day)

* The average time spent asleep is 419.2 minutes(approx. 7 hours), which is just within the recommended hours of 7 hours or more per day by the CDC. Source: [CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/sleep/about_sleep/how_much_sleep.html)

## Data Visualizations

First, I'll merge both dataframes together 

**Merging these two dataframes together**
```{r}
merged_df <- sleep_df %>% full_join(daily_df, 
                    by = c( "Id", "Date") )
```

Take a look at how many participants are in this data set.

```{r}
n_distinct(merged_df$Id)
```

### Plotting a few explorations


#### What's the relationship between steps taken in a day and sedentary minutes? 
```{r Total step & Sedentary minutes}
ggplot(data=merged_df, aes(x=TotalSteps, y=SedentaryMinutes)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Relationship between Total steps and Sedantary minutes", x= "Total Steps", y= "Sedentary Minutes")
```

The scatterplot shows a negative correlation between total steps and sedentary minutes i.e the higher the sedentary minutes, the lesser the total steps taken.

#### Does the Total number of steps have any impact on Calories burned?
```{r}
ggplot(data = merged_df, aes(x = TotalSteps , y = Calories, color = Calories)) +
  geom_point() + geom_smooth() +
  labs( title = "Impact of total steps taken on Calories burned", x = "Total Steps taken", y = "Calories burned (KCal")
```


From the scatter plot above, we can notice that:

* There's a positive correlation between steps taken and calories burned.

* Calories burned at 3000 kcal(0.857 lbs.) or more occurs when users are at the total step range of around 7000 to 15000 steps.

*Outliers noted*:

* Zero steps with zero to minimal calories burned

* 1 observation of more than 35,000 steps with less than 3,000 calories burned.


#### What is the relationship between time spent being active and calories burned?
```{r}
ggplot(data = merged_df, aes(x = TotalActiveMinutes, y = Calories, color = Calories)) +
  geom_point() + geom_smooth() +
  labs( title = "Relationship between time spent being active and Calories burned", x = "TIme being active", y = "Calories burned (KCal")
```

The scatterplot also shows a positive relationship between total time spent being active and amount of calories.The more active participants were, the more calories they burned.
*Outliers noted*:

* About 2000 to 3000 kcal calories burned at zero minutes spent being active.


#### Does time spent being active have any impact on sleep patterns?
```{r}
ggplot(data = merged_df, aes(x = TotalActiveMinutes, y = TotalMinutesAsleep)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() +
   labs( title = "Impact of total time being active on sleeping patterns", x= "Time being active", y = "Time spent sleeping")
```

The data indicates there is no correlation between time spent being active and time asleep, hence time being active has no effect on sleeping patterns.

#### Is there any relationship between sedentary behavior and sleeping patterns?
```{r}
ggplot(data = merged_df, aes(x = SedentaryMinutes, y = TotalMinutesAsleep)) +
  geom_point() + geom_smooth() +
labs( title = "Relationship between Sedentary behavior and sleep patterns", x = "Sedentary minutes", y = "Time spent sleeping")
```

The plot shows a negative correlation between sedentary minutes and total time spent sleeping.

### Final Conclusion and Recommendation

Following my analysis, I will be sharing my insights and providing recommendations based on my analysis.

Trends identified by the data:

* Insufficient Daily Step Count: The average daily steps recorded for users of non-Bellabeat smart devices are below the recommended 10,000 steps per day for general fitness. This trend indicates that there is room for improvement in terms of physical activity levels among users.

* High Sedentary Behavior: Participants in the analysis spent a significant amount of time in sedentary behavior, accounting for approximately 81% of their total average minutes. This trend highlights the need to reduce sedentary behavior and encourage more movement throughout the day.

* Correlation Between Steps and Calories Burned: Users who achieve a higher step count tend to burn more calories, indicating that physical activity contributes to increased energy expenditure.

* Negative Correlation Between Sedentary Minutes and Total Steps: This trend indicates that individuals with higher sedentary behavior tend to take fewer steps throughout the day

**Recommendations**

Based on these insights, my conclusion is that there is an opportunity for Bellabeat to focus on encouraging users to increase their daily step count, reduce sedentary behavior, and promote a more active lifestyle. The correlation between steps taken and calories burned suggests that by motivating users to reach a step count range of around 7,000 to 15,000 steps, they can achieve optimal calorie burn.

To address these opportunities, Bellabeat could consider incorporating features or functionalities in their products and app that actively encourage users to reach their daily step goals, provide reminders to reduce sedentary behavior and offer personalized activity recommendations. Gamification elements, challenges, and rewards can also be utilized to motivate users and make the experience more engaging.

Furthermore, Bellabeat can leverage the negative correlation between sedentary minutes and total time spent sleeping to highlight the importance of reducing sedentary behavior for a better active lifestyle which could improve sleep quality. Providing insights and recommendations on sleep hygiene and establishing routines that encourage physical activity during the day could be beneficial.

By leveraging these insights and implementing targeted marketing strategies, Bellabeat can position itself as a comprehensive health and wellness solution, helping users improve their fitness levels, sleep patterns, and overall well-being


